README.md, before:

# papyri-docker

Dockerized papyri.info stack.

Clone with:

    git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/dcthree/papyri-docker

## Running

From this repository's directory:

1. `docker-compose build`
2. `docker-compose up -d`
3. Watch logs in a separate terminal in the same directory: `docker-compose logs -f -t`
4. If all is successful, you should be able to access the running copy once `httpd` comes up at: <http://127.0.0.1:8000>

## Gotchas

* **Disk Space**: after bringing up a complete stack, my `docker system df` shows 40GB of images, 1GB of containers, and 26GB of volumes (**67GB total**). You may need to increase the default disk allocation if you're running e.g. Docker for Mac.
* **Network Port**: if another service is already bound to port 8000, `httpd` will fail to come up. If this happens, you can just stop the other service and run `docker-compose up -d` again.
* **Memory**: I have 16GB of RAM, 1GB of swap, and 6 VCPUs allocated to Docker. Bringing this up makes my system quite slow...
* **Initial Indexing**: if something goes wrong with the indexing process, you may need to use `docker-compose up -d --force-recreate` when re-trying.
* **Docker Compose Timeout**: the default Docker Compose HTTP timeout of 60 seconds can sometimes cause problems with `docker-compose up`/`docker-compose stop`, due to the delay in responsiveness of some services. If you run into this, prefix the commands with e.g. `COMPOSE_HTTP_TIMEOUT=10000`.

## Structure

* `httpd`: Apache 2.2 server, proxies the Navigator, Editor, XSugar, and Fuseki
  * `indexer`: container that runs the indexing process using the below services
    * `navigator`: the main ["Papyrological Navigator"](https://github.com/papyri/navigator) server
    * `fuseki`: Apache Jena Fuseki 1.x SPARQL Server (aka "Numbers Server")
    * `tomcat-pn`: Tomcat server runing "dispatch" and "sync" servlets
    * `solr`: Tomcat server running Apache Solr for search
  * `sosol`: Puma server serving the Rails [Editor (aka "SoSOL")](http://github.com/sosol/sosol) application
    * `xsugar`: container that runs [XSugar](https://github.com/papyri/xsugar), an XML transformer used by `sosol`
  * `mysql`: MySQL 5.6 server, shared by `sosol`, and `tomcat-pn`
  * `repo_clone`: shared Git checkout of the large main [`idp.data`](https://github.com/papyri/idp.data) repository, shared by `navigator`, `fuseki`, `tomcat-pn`, `sosol`, & `httpd`

The papyri.info "Top Level Data Flow" diagram may help with understanding:

![Top Level Data Flow diagram for papyri.info](http://papyri.github.io/documentation/system_level/images/TopLevelDataFlow-new.jpg)

## Service Startup Order

Services get started in the following order:

* `mysql`: no service/startup dependencies
* `fuseki`: no service/startup dependencies
* `xsugar`: no service/startup dependencies
* `repo_clone`:  no service/startup dependencies, clones `canonical`
* `navigator`: once `canonical` is cloned and `fuseki` is up, sets config for `solr`, builds WAR files for `tomcat-pn`, runs "mapping" which loads data into `fuseki`
* `solr`: once solr config (`/opt/solr/server/solr/solr.xml.lock`) is in place, written by `navigator`
* `indexer`: once `fuseki` and `solr` are up and `mapping` is done, runs "indexing" which loads data into `solr`
* `tomcat-pn`: once WAR files are built by `navigator` and "mapping" is done
* `sosol`: once `canonical` is cloned and `mysql` is available, though some functionality depends on `fuseki` (as well as "mapping" from `navigator`) and `xsugar`
* `httpd`: once `/srv/data/papyri.info/git/navigator/pn-config/pi.conf` is in place and the proxied services `sosol`, `xsugar`, `tomcat-pn`, `fuseki`, and `solr` are available, Apache is started up as `httpd`

Service startup order is important, and the current `docker-compose.yml` uses several strategies to control it:

1. [`wait-for-it.sh`](https://github.com/vishnubob/wait-for-it) used to wait for network service availability; `indexer` uses it to wait for `solr` startup, `sosol` uses it to wait for `mysql` startup
2. lockfiles on shared volumes are used to enforce processes that only need to run once only running once; these lockfiles are also sometimes used as a wait signal for containers that need the process to finish before they can run (these busy-wait until the lockfile exists)

Some containers also use `links` and `depends_on` clauses, but these are no longer relied upon to enforce startup order.

## Servers vs. Processes

You may note that we have some containers which run as continuous *servers*, and others which are containerized *processes* for building artifacts needed by those servers. Categorizing them may be useful:

**Servers:**
* `http`
* `fuseki`
* `solr`
* `sosol`
* `tomcat-pn`
* `mysql`
* `xsugar`

**Processes:**
* `repo_clone`
* `navigator`
* `indexer`

Commit message:

Add notes for GitHub username/token (fixes #6)

README.md, after:

# papyri-docker

Dockerized papyri.info stack.

Clone with:

    git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/dcthree/papyri-docker

## Running

First, you need to obtain a [GitHub Personal Access Token with package registry permissions](https://docs.github.com/en/packages/learn-github-packages/about-permissions-for-github-packages#about-scopes-and-permissions-for-package-registries) (see "[Creating a personal access token](https://docs.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token)"), and set it as the environment variable `GITHUB_TOKEN` for the `docker-compose` process. You'll also need to set the environment variable `GITHUB_USERNAME` to your GitHub username. There are a variety of ways you can set these environment variables, [including using an unversioned `.env` file in the directory where you've cloned this repository](https://docs.docker.com/compose/environment-variables/). These environment variables must be available for the `navigator` container to successfully build packages.

Then, from this repository's directory:

1. `docker-compose build`
2. `docker-compose up -d`
3. Watch logs in a separate terminal in the same directory: `docker-compose logs -f -t`
4. If all is successful, you should be able to access the running copy once `httpd` comes up at: <http://127.0.0.1:8000>

## Gotchas

* **Disk Space**: after bringing up a complete stack, my `docker system df` shows 40GB of images, 1GB of containers, and 26GB of volumes (**67GB total**). You may need to increase the default disk allocation if you're running e.g. Docker for Mac.
* **Network Port**: if another service is already bound to port 8000, `httpd` will fail to come up. If this happens, you can just stop the other service and run `docker-compose up -d` again.
* **Memory**: I have 16GB of RAM, 1GB of swap, and 6 VCPUs allocated to Docker. Bringing this up makes my system quite slow...
* **Initial Indexing**: if something goes wrong with the indexing process, you may need to use `docker-compose up -d --force-recreate` when re-trying.
* **Docker Compose Timeout**: the default Docker Compose HTTP timeout of 60 seconds can sometimes cause problems with `docker-compose up`/`docker-compose stop`, due to the delay in responsiveness of some services. If you run into this, prefix the commands with e.g. `COMPOSE_HTTP_TIMEOUT=10000`.

## Structure

* `httpd`: Apache 2.2 server, proxies the Navigator, Editor, XSugar, and Fuseki
  * `indexer`: container that runs the indexing process using the below services
    * `navigator`: the main ["Papyrological Navigator"](https://github.com/papyri/navigator) server
    * `fuseki`: Apache Jena Fuseki 1.x SPARQL Server (aka "Numbers Server")
    * `tomcat-pn`: Tomcat server runing "dispatch" and "sync" servlets
    * `solr`: Tomcat server running Apache Solr for search
  * `sosol`: Puma server serving the Rails [Editor (aka "SoSOL")](http://github.com/sosol/sosol) application
    * `xsugar`: container that runs [XSugar](https://github.com/papyri/xsugar), an XML transformer used by `sosol`
  * `mysql`: MySQL 5.6 server, shared by `sosol`, and `tomcat-pn`
  * `repo_clone`: shared Git checkout of the large main [`idp.data`](https://github.com/papyri/idp.data) repository, shared by `navigator`, `fuseki`, `tomcat-pn`, `sosol`, & `httpd`

The papyri.info "Top Level Data Flow" diagram may help with understanding:

![Top Level Data Flow diagram for papyri.info](http://papyri.github.io/documentation/system_level/images/TopLevelDataFlow-new.jpg)

## Service Startup Order

Services get started in the following order:

* `mysql`: no service/startup dependencies
* `fuseki`: no service/startup dependencies
* `xsugar`: no service/startup dependencies
* `repo_clone`:  no service/startup dependencies, clones `canonical`
* `navigator`: once `canonical` is cloned and `fuseki` is up, sets config for `solr`, builds WAR files for `tomcat-pn`, runs "mapping" which loads data into `fuseki`
* `solr`: once solr config (`/opt/solr/server/solr/solr.xml.lock`) is in place, written by `navigator`
* `indexer`: once `fuseki` and `solr` are up and `mapping` is done, runs "indexing" which loads data into `solr`
* `tomcat-pn`: once WAR files are built by `navigator` and "mapping" is done
* `sosol`: once `canonical` is cloned and `mysql` is available, though some functionality depends on `fuseki` (as well as "mapping" from `navigator`) and `xsugar`
* `httpd`: once `/srv/data/papyri.info/git/navigator/pn-config/pi.conf` is in place and the proxied services `sosol`, `xsugar`, `tomcat-pn`, `fuseki`, and `solr` are available, Apache is started up as `httpd`

Service startup order is important, and the current `docker-compose.yml` uses several strategies to control it:

1. [`wait-for-it.sh`](https://github.com/vishnubob/wait-for-it) used to wait for network service availability; `indexer` uses it to wait for `solr` startup, `sosol` uses it to wait for `mysql` startup
2. lockfiles on shared volumes are used to enforce processes that only need to run once only running once; these lockfiles are also sometimes used as a wait signal for containers that need the process to finish before they can run (these busy-wait until the lockfile exists)

Some containers also use `links` and `depends_on` clauses, but these are no longer relied upon to enforce startup order.

## Servers vs. Processes

You may note that we have some containers which run as continuous *servers*, and others which are containerized *processes* for building artifacts needed by those servers. Categorizing them may be useful:

**Servers:**
* `http`
* `fuseki`
* `solr`
* `sosol`
* `tomcat-pn`
* `mysql`
* `xsugar`

**Processes:**
* `repo_clone`
* `navigator`
* `indexer`
